<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>Sapiens</title>
<link href="../styles/9780062316103_template.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:3613b99d-5f38-4977-8ac3-567d1f823469" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="backmatter">
<div>
<section epub:type="frontmatter" title="Praise">
<h2 class="h2b" id="pra"><span class="right_1" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_a" title="a"/><a href="9780062316103_Contents.xhtml#rpra">Praise for <i>Sapiens</i></a></h2>
<p class="fmcenter"><b>A <i>Booklist</i> Best Book of the Year</b></p>
<p class="fmcenter"><b>One of <i>The Atlantic</i>’s “Best Books We Read”</b></p>
<p class="fmcenter"><b>A Mark Zuckerberg Facebook Book Club Pick</b></p>
<p class="fmcenter"><b>One of Bill Gates’ 10 Favorite Books</b></p>
<p class="noindenta">“<i>Sapiens</i> takes readers on a sweeping tour of the history of our species. . . . Harari’s formidable intellect sheds light on the biggest breakthroughs in the human story. . . . Important reading for serious-minded, self-reflective sapiens.”</p>
<p class="right">—<i>Washington Post</i></p>
<p class="noindent">“<i>Sapiens</i> is learned, thought-provoking, and crisply written. . . . Fascinating.”</p>
<p class="right">—<i>Wall Street Journal</i></p>
<p class="noindent">“Yuval Noah Harari’s celebrated <i>Sapiens</i> does for human evolution what Stephen Hawking’s <i>A Brief History of Time</i> did for physics. . . . He does a superb job of outlining our slow emergence, and eventual domination, of the planet.”</p>
<p class="right">—<i>Forbes</i></p>
<p class="noindent">“It is one of the best accounts by a <i>Homo sapiens</i> of the unlikely story of our violent, accomplished species. . . . It is one hell of a story. And it has seldom been told better. . . . Compulsively readable and impossibly learned.”</p>
<p class="right">—Michael Gerson, <i>Washington Post</i></p>
<p class="noindent">“This was the most surprising and thought-provoking book I read this year.”</p>
<p class="right">—<i>The Atlantic</i></p>
<p class="noindent">“[A]mbitious and illuminating.”</p>
<p class="right">—<i>Christian Science Monitor</i></p>
<p class="noindent">“[S]urprisingly impactful on understanding day-to-day life.”</p>
<p class="right">—<i>Politico</i></p>
<p class="noindent">“[Harari’s] style is breezy and engaging. Reading [<i>Sapiens</i>] is like joining a wide-ranging and provocative dinner table conversation. You may not agree with it all, but it makes for a memorable meal.”</p>
<p class="right">—<i>Chronicle of Higher Education</i></p>
<p class="noindent">“A must-read for any human—or aspiring bot.”</p>
<p class="right">—<i>Wired</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><span class="right_1" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_b" title="b"/>“<i>Sapiens</i> takes readers on a sweeping tour of the history of our species. The author structures this ambitious journey around the three momentous events that have irrevocably shaped the destiny of humankind: the cognitive revolution, the agricultural revolution, and the scientific revolution. . . . Harari is the intellectural heir to T. H. Huxley.”</p>
<p class="right">—<i>Concord Monitor</i></p>
<p class="noindent">“We are the subject of an ambitious and illuminating new book by the Israeli historian Yuval Noah Harari. <i>Sapiens</i> tells the wonderful and terrifying saga of the human species on earth, from our prehistory as hunter-gatherers to our present as technical wizards and hopeful colonizers of new planets.”</p>
<p class="right">—<i>Anchorage Daily News</i></p>
<p class="noindent">“Harari shows that humanity as we know it has not been around that long when compared to the lifespan of our planet. More interestingly and more originally, he explains, in a compelling way, why humanity as we know it may not continue for that long in its current form, either.”</p>
<p class="right">—<i>National Review</i></p>
<p class="noindent">“[E]rudite, absorbing, and often witty.”</p>
<p class="right">—<i>Jewish Review of Books</i></p>
<p class="noindent">“An absorbing, provocative history of civilization . . . packed with heretical thinking and surprising facts. This riveting, myth-busting book cannot be summarized . . . you will simply have to read it.”</p>
<p class="right">—John Gray, <i>Financial Times</i> (London)</p>
<p class="noindent">“The sort of book that sweeps the cobwebs out of your brain. . . . Harari . . . is an intellectural acrobat whose logical leaps will have you gasping with admiration.”</p>
<p class="right">—John Carey, <i>Sunday Times</i> (London)</p>
<p class="noindent">“Harari’s account of how we conquered the earth astonishes with its scope and imagination. . . . One of those rare books that lives up to the publisher’s blurb . . . brilliantly clear, witty, and erudite.”</p>
<p class="right">—Ben Shepard, <i>The Observer</i> (London)</p>
<p class="noindent">“Full of . . . high-perspective, shocking, and wondrous stories, as well as strange theories and startling insights.”</p>
<p class="right">—Bryan Appleyard, <i>Sunday Times</i> (London)</p>
<p class="noindent">“Not only is Harari eloquent and humane, he is often wonderfully, mordantly funny.”</p>
<p class="right">—<i>The Independent</i> (London)</p>
<p class="noindent"><span class="right_1" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_c" title="c"/>“Engaging and informative. . . . Extremely interesting.”</p>
<p class="right">—<i>The Guardian</i> (London)</p>
<p class="noindent">“Harari can write . . . really, really write, with wit, clarity, elegance, and a wonderful eye for metaphor.”</p>
<p class="right">—<i>The Times</i> (Ireland)</p>
<p class="noindent">“This title is one of the exceptional works of nonfiction that is both highly intellectual and compulsively readable. . . . A fascinating, hearty read.”</p>
<p class="right">—<i>Library Journal</i> (starred review)</p>
<p class="noindent">“An encyclopedic approach from a well-versed scholar who is concise but eloquent, both skeptical and opinionated, and open enough to entertain competing points of view. . . . The great debates of history aired out with satisfying vigor.”</p>
<p class="right">—<i>Kirkus Reviews</i> (starred review)</p>
<p class="noindent">“Writing with wit and verve, Harari . . . attempts to explain how <i>Homo sapiens</i> came to be the dominant species on Earth as well as the sole representative of the human genus. . . . Provocative and entertaining.”</p>
<p class="right">—<i>Publishers Weekly</i></p>
<p class="noindent">“It’s not often that a book offers readers the possibility to reconsider, well, everything. But that’s what Harari does in this sweeping look at the history of humans. . . . Readers of every stripe should put this at the top of their reading lists. Thinking has never been so enjoyable.”</p>
<p class="right">—<i>Booklist</i> (starred review)</p>
<p class="noindent">“I would recommend this book to anyone interested in a fun, engaging look at early human history. . . . You’ll have a hard time putting it down.”</p>
<p class="right">—Bill Gates</p>
<p class="noindent">“Thank God someone finally wrote [this] exact book.”</p>
<p class="right">—Sebastian Junger</p>
<p class="noindent">“<i>Sapiens</i> tackles the biggest questions of history and of the modern world, and it is written in unforgettably vivid language.”</p>
<p class="right">—Jared Diamond</p>
<p class="noindent">“In <i>Sapiens</i>, Harari delves deep into our history as a species to help us understand who we are and what made us this way. An engrossing read.”</p>
<p class="rightA">—Dan Ariely<span class="right_1" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_d" title="d"/><span class="right_1" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_i" title="i"/><span class="right_1" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_ii" title="ii"/></p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>